RFC: ID_Compat_Math characters allowed in identifiers (#3840)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/3840-compat-math-identifiers.md

This can be a boon to implementers of scientific concepts as they can write for example `let ∇E₁₂ = 0.5;`.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Programming languages have historically focused on the quite narrow set of ASCII characters, however developers from other cultures or specialized problem spaces can benefit from using characters which are native to their culture or domain.
The vast body of scientific literature uses a variety of characters to express concepts from physics, mathematics, biology, robotics and many others.
Symbols often appearing in equations are Roman letters like `x`, Greek letters like `θ`, and differentiation operators like `∂` and `∇`.
Variables are often adorned with subscripts like `x₁₂` or superscripts like `x⁺` or `x⁽²⁾`.

> Having these symbols available as Rust identifiers could simplify the implementation of these concepts and stay closer to a reference publication, thus reducing confusing and implementation errors.

Reviewer: Grammar: typically it's "reducing confusion and implementation errors" or "reducing confusing errors and implementation errors" 

```suggestion
Having these symbols available as Rust identifiers could simplify the implementation of these concepts and stay closer to a reference publication, thus reducing confusion, and implementation errors.
```

For example instead of:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```rust
```

5) `𝛁𝛛𝛻𝜕𝜵𝝏𝝯𝞉𝞩𝟃`  (italic and bold versions of `∂` and `∇`) from various sets like [Bold Greek symbols](https://util.unicode.org/UnicodeJsps/list-unicodeset.jsp?a=%5Cp%7BNames_List_Subheader=Bold%20Greek%20symbols%7D).

The characters 1) - 4) are added to the set of characters allowed in Rust identifiers.
[UAX31](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr31/#Standard_Profiles) notes that "supporting these characters is recommended for some computer languages because they can be beneficial in some applications".

In other words this RFC proposes to adopt the "Mathematical Compatibility Notation Profile" which in accordance with [UAX31-R3b](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr31/#R3b) allows these characters in identifiers and in turn prevents syntactic use.
For example `let a = 2.0; let b = a²;` will naturally give a compiler error that `a²` is an unknown identifier and not be interpreted as `let b = a * a;`.
Similarly `let a = [2, 0]; let b = a₁;` will naturally give a compiler error that `a₁` is an unknown identifier and not be interpreted as `let b = a[0];`.
`∞` will just be a character usable in identifiers and not be a synonym to the likes of `f32::INFINITY`.

> The characters 5) are added to the set of Rust identifiers, but will trigger an NFKC or `uncommon_codepoints` warning when used depending on their Unicode classification.

Reviewer 3: Another side note to mention, also to clarify the above, is that NFKC effectively removes super/subscripts when normalizing, and I personally think it's kind of weird that this results in some normalized characters which are not normally allowed in identifiers. (for example, parentheses and +/- signs)

I think it's particularly strange that these are included in the definition at all, but I guess it *kind* of makes sense.

For example using `𝛁` in an identifier will trigger:
```
warning: identifier contains a non normalized (NFKC) character: '𝛁'
```
similarly to how characters like `𝑥` (instead of `x`) or `𝑓` (instead of `f`) are triggering this warning in stable Rust today.
This follows the guidelines from the [Unicode Technical Standard #55 - Source Code Handling (UTS55)](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr55/#General-Security-Profile) which recommends that "implementations should provide a mechanism to warn about identifiers that are not in the General Security Profile for Identifiers" as defined in the [Unicode Technical Standard #39 - Unicode Security Mechanisms (UTS39)](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39/#General_Security_Profile).
In particular the characters in 5) are identified as "Not_NFKC", i.e. characters that cannot occur in strings normalized to [NFKC](https://unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Norm_Forms).

Note that Unicode specifically [mentions Rust as a positive industry example](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr55/#General-Security-Profile) that follows the recommendations from the General Security Profile.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> * Characters like `𝛁𝛛𝛻𝜕𝜵𝝏𝝯𝞉𝞩𝟃` are easily confusable with their base versions `∂∇` and can lead to subtle bugs. However the precedence in Rust seems to be to add them alongside their base version but trigger the NFKC warning.

Reviewer: "precedence" means "priority" (like operator precedence), "precedent" means "previous decision"

```suggestion
* Characters like `𝛁𝛛𝛻𝜕𝜵𝝏𝝯𝞉𝞩𝟃` are easily confusable with their base versions `∂∇` and can lead to subtle bugs. However the precedent in Rust is to add them alongside their base version, but trigger the NFKC warning.
```

* Some developers prefer to only use ASCII characters for programming. This paradigm can be enforced today via `deny(non_ascii_idents)`. This would disallow all characters added by this RFC.

* The superscript characters could be confused with actual mathematical operations. For example someone might write `let a = 2.0; let b = 3.0 * a²;` and be confused that this will result in a compiler error. There might also be the potential for subtle bugs like `let a² = 2; let a = 2; let x = a²;` and erronously assuming that `x = 4`, however one can argue that this is not due to the superscript characters as it can happen as well when only using ASCII characters: `let a_sq = 2; let a = 2; let x = a_sq;`.

* The subscript characters could be confused with indexing operation. For example someone might write  `let a = [2, 0]; let b = a₁;` and be confused that this will result in a compiler error.

* Some people might find it difficult to read superscript and subscript letters on lower resolution screens or when using small font sizes.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

> If this RFC is not implemented then everyone has to keep using ASCII characters for identifier in scientific code, for example `gradient_energy` or `a_12`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this RFC is not implemented then everyone has to keep using ASCII characters for identifiers in scientific code, for example `gradient_energy` or `a_12`.
```

The impact of not implementing it should be fairly small, but implementing it could invite more scientific oriented people to the Rust language and make it easier for them to implement complex concepts.

Alternatively Rust could decide to give the proposed characters syntatic meaning.

Superscript characters could be interpreted as exponentiation, for example `let a = 2; let b = a²;` could be a synonym to `let a = 2; let b = a * a;`.
This would open up a host of questions and potential issues, like:
- Should `a²⁻³` be interpreted as `1/a`?
- There is no superscript character for multiplication `*` or division `/`.

> `∞` could be a synonym or replacement to `f32::INIFITY`, however there is no precedence for using non-ASCII characters in `core`/`std` and this would likely meet considerable opposition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`∞` could be a synonym or replacement to `f32::INIFITY`, however there is no precedent for using non-ASCII characters in `core`/`std` and this would likely meet considerable opposition.
```

Derivatives could be added as a language feature using auto-differentiation techniques and `∇` and `∂` could be given syntactic meaning.
For example Mathematica supports the syntax `∂ₓf` for a partial derivative of `f` with respect to `x` and the syntax `∇ₓf` for the gradient with respect to `x`.
Moreover there is [experimental support for automatic differentiation](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/124509) being worked on for rustc which uses an attribute `#[autodiff(df, ..)]` with a user-provided function name (`df` in this case) for the automatically generated derivative.

> A potential synergy with this RFC would be that the developer can choose `∇f` as the function name of the automatically created derivative via `#[autodiff(∇f, ..)]`, however Rust could also decide to automatically use `∇f` as the name of such derivatives and thus giving `∇f` syntactic meaning.

Reviewer: Usually it's "thus giving" or "and give".

Also the sentence could be split so it's easier to read.

```suggestion
This RFC would allow `∇f` as the function name of the automatically created derivative via `#[autodiff(∇f, ..)]`. However, Rust could also decide to automatically use `∇f` as the name of such derivatives, and give `∇f` syntactic meaning.
```

Example which compiles in stable Rust without warning:
```rust
fn main() {
    let 鳯 = 3;  // U+9CF5: "phoenix" (old variant)
    let 鳳 = 4;  // U+9CF4: modern simplified/traditional
    let 隱 = 5;  // U+96B1: “hidden”
    let 隠 = 6;  // U+96B0: nearly identical glyph
    println!("鳯 = {}, 鳳 = {}", 鳯, 鳳);
    println!("隱 = {}, 隠 = {}", 隱, 隠);
}
```

A vast set of characters added as part of Unicode character sets are easily confusable with other characters.
Example which compiles in stable Rust and triggers a "warning: identifier contains a non normalized (NFKC) character":
```rust
fn main() {
    let l = 1.0;
    let ℓ = l + 2.0;
    let 𝑓𝑢𝑛𝑐 = |𝑥: f32| 𝑥 * ℓ + l;
    let Σ = (1..5).map(|𝑖| 𝑓𝑢𝑛𝑐(𝑖 as f32)).sum::<f32>();
    println!("∑: {Σ}");
}
```

There are characters which one might argue should never have been added but are part of allowed Unicode sets.
Example which compiles in stable Rust and triggers a "warning: identifier contains an uncommon character":
```rust
fn ᅟ() {  // U+115F (Hangul Choseong Filler) renders as blank
    println!("boo");
}

fn main() {
    ᅟ();  // dito
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the character is the name of the function, even though it renders inside the parentheses in some browsers.

```
